SAMPLE FILM SYNOPSES


The following are sample synopses of real films. You may want to watch the film with the rating most likely to apply to your film. Then write your version of a synopsis before reading mine. How do they compare?  This isn't a test, and there is no right or wrong. It is merely to demonstrate for you how to carry out the principles enumerated in the book. Your goal is to let the investor know what happens in the film, while keeping the synopsis preferably within one page but not more than two. My versions are simply guides toward that end. In addition, don't announce a rating unless you are sure it is what the film will receive. Please note that two of the films (The First of May and The Blair Witch Project) are from business plans of my clients; I had nothing to do with the other two films.


G-Rated Film, The First Of May

The First of May, SHO Entertainment's first feature film, is a children's story of two lost souls ― one, an eleven-year-old boy; the other, a seventy-year-old woman. They fill a need in each
other as they run away together looking for something more in their lives. Young Cory, a lonely foster child, meets Carlotta, an aging gypsy, as she sits on the porch of her nursing home. One day Carlotta gives Cory a five-dollar bill to buy ingredients for "halvah," a Middle Eastern candy, even though she is not allowed to cook. Sybil, director of the nursing home, tries to get the money from Cory, but he avoids her and brings the ingredients to Carlotta that night. The task makes Cory late for dinner, and his foster parents, Dan and Michelle, send him to bed without dinner.

While Cory is off to school, Michelle learns she is pregnant. Overhearing his parents discussing how to tell him the news, Cory incorrectly assumes he is being sent back to the foster agency. That night he runs away and goes to say goodbye to his only friend, Carlotta. She decides to go with him. The two fugitives sell Carlotta's halvah in a new town. After a nosy neighbor calls the attention of a foot patrolman to the pair, he chases them. Carlotta (now known as "Grandma") and Cory travel to another town hundreds of miles away. There Carlotta finds a circus at which she worked forty years earlier; many old friends are still there, as well as Hannah Belle, an elephant she helped birth. Cory joins the circus and learns to juggle and ride a motorcycle, the latter his late father's first love. Portia becomes his best friend. The runaways claim to Cory's teacher that his school records and birth certificate were lost. After his teacher receives a disturbing reply to her request to the state for Cory's school records, she overhears Cory tell Carlotta how happy he is to have gotten away before they sent him to an institution. Touched, she pockets the letter for the time being. 

Finally Cory debuts as a motorcycle act. The crowd goes wild but Carlotta isn't there ― she has collapsed and is in intensive care at the hospital!  Boss Ed, the circus owner, pays the hospital bill and gives Cory their severance pay as the circus family (including best friend Portia) leaves town. Outside the hospital, Cory drops the severance pay in a Salvation Army bucket, telling the bell-ringer, "God bless my Grandma, please."

The next day, Carlotta wakes up and whispers that she is proud of Cory. Her heart monitor slows to a flat line; Cory rushes out as the monitor's alarm goes off. Someone tackles him; it is Dan. He and Michelle are ecstatic to find Cory and ask him to be a big brother to their new child. "We want to adopt you," Michelle says. Cory says he would like that, but he has to take care of Grandma. 

Some months later, Cory has his first-ever birthday party. His new baby sister is seated in a swing. Michelle gives him some halvah to taste. As Cory calls it "just as good as Grandma used to make," another voice says, "I'll be the judge of that."  To the surprise of the movie audience, 
Carlotta enters the room. She survived her heart attack and Dan and Michelle "adopted" her, too. As Cory goes out to play catch with Dan, he is shocked to see all of his circus friends gathered to celebrate his birthday!  

**********


PG-Rated Film, Big Fat Liar

Big Fat Liar is a pre-teen fantasy romp about telling the truth and good winning over evil. Jason Shepherd is 14-year-old who habitually tells lies to his parents, teachers, and anyone else. Drawing on his own life, Jason writes a composition for English class about a boy who is a big, fat liar. Hurrying to get the paper to school on time, Jason slams into the limo of Marty Wolf, a Hollywood producer scouting locations. Conning his way into the car for a ride to school, Jason accidentally leaves his paper behind getting out of the car. Naturally, his teacher and parents don't believe he actually wrote a paper at all. 

Desperate for a good picture before the studio drops him, Wolf decides to make a film based on Jason’s paper. Seeing an advance trailer for the film (which has yet to be produced), Jason realizes it is his paper. Telling one more lie (a “white one”) to his parents who are gone for the weekend, Jason and his best friend, Kaylee, decide to go to Hollywood. They foolishly believe that Wolf will tell Jason’s parents the truth. Arriving at the studio in Hollywood, the kids have to use a ruse just to get into Wolf’s office. Confronted by Jason, Wolf can’t believe that the kid doesn’t want money or fame, just a call to his Dad. Getting the original composition from his file, Wolf sets it on fire.

Determining they have to force Wolf to tell the truth, Jason and Kaylee get onto the lot via the Universal tour. Hiding out in the wardrobe and props department, they plot their revenge. By following Wolf around town, the studio, and to his home, Jason sees that Wolf is totally self-centered and mean to everyone around him. Eventually, Jason is easily able to win the sympathy of two key allies: limo driver Frank and Marty's secretary Mondy. Frank has reason for revenge. He was a hopeful actor until Marty wrote "loser" on his picture and sent it to every casting director in town. Mondy is tired of being flamed for Wolf’s mistakes. 

With practical jokes, Jason and Kaylee try to humiliate the producer into making the phone call to Jason’s dad. They put blue dye in Wolf’s swimming pool and have Mary send him to a fake meeting at the house of the studio head with his body still blue and his hair still orange. Eventually, Wolf spends a day trying to get to the studio but is foiled by funny and outrageous pranks, such as his limo stalling, an apparently dangerous ride he has in a sports car, and being forced to parachute out of a helicopter. When Wolf finally makes it to the studio, he and Jason face off on a rooftop on the lot. Jason finally gets Wolf, who thinks no one can hear them,  to admit that he stole the film idea from the kid’s paper and that he thinks the truth is overrated. At that point, a director yells cut and several cameras appear from nearby rooftops. To Wolf's surprise and Jason's delight, the whole scene is being shown on a big screen to Jason’s parents, the studio head, the employees of the studio, and the Hollywood press corps. Wolf is fired.

The Big Fat Liar movie is made with Mondy, Jason, Frank, and everyone else involved in Wolf's comeuppance. Wolf ends up as a party clown. Good wins over evil, and we know for sure that honesty is always the best policy.

**********

PG-13 Rated Film, Songcatcher

Songcatcher is a drama with romance and includes fifteen traditional folk songs sung throughout the film. The story speaks to today’s women and society as much as to? its setting in the early 1900s. Musicologist Dr. Lily Penleric is passed over for academic promotion. Angry, she leaves and goes to visit her sister in the hills of Appalachia. While previously finding little joy in the world of music, the songs and people of Appalachia open up a new world for Lily. 

Her sister, Elna, and Elna’s teaching partner, Harriet, have taken in a local teenage girl, Deladis. When Lily hears Deladis singing songs that came from the British Isles as many as 200 years previously, she is intrigued. Songs such as "Barbara Allen" are familiar, but the versions sung here are the originals and have not changed for generations. Lily drags cumbersome equipment up the mountain to record the music on wax cylinders. At first most of the locals are suspicious of this stranger from the city, who seems stiff and formal with them. Eventually her enthusiasm starts winning over many of the mountain people, and their easy outlook towards life changes Lily.  

Tom Bledsoe, who has lived in the valley, is a local leader and thinks that Lily (a “lowlander”) wants to steal the songs. She initially wants to publish a book and make her mark in the academic world from which she has fled. Eventually, Lily becomes more interested in preserving this culture than exploiting it. She also starts helping Tom in his fight against a coal company representative trying to swindle the locals into selling their land at low prices. Viney Butler, Tom’s aunt, is won over to Lily’s side in short order. They are both determined women who want to have their own way in a male-dominated world. Viney? helps her meet the singers in the area. 

Over time, several relationships come to light. The schoolteachers, Elna and Harriet, are lesbians and terrified of being discovered. Tom and Lily begin to "spark" at a hoedown. Alice, one of the women to whom Lily goes for songs, has a cheating husband. A local boy is sweet on Deladis. One night he sees Elna and Harriet making out in the woods, reports it to others, and their school, including Lily’s recording cylinders and transcribed sheet music, is burned to the ground. Harriet flees the mountain, but Elna elects to stay and rebuild both her school and place in the community. The next day a local minister calls a meeting to denounce the teachers and their school as sent by the devil. While Lily, Tom, and Deladis are trying to defend Elna, Alice arrives and shoots her wayward husband. 

With the songs lost, Lily decides it is time to return to the city. After some coaxing, Tom and Deladis agree to go along. Lily’s plan is to record songs and sell them in the new record market.
On the way down the hill, they meet the musicologist who the University hired to replace Lily. He plans to take up recording the songs and share credit with Lily, even though she will not be working with him. As the film ends, Tom and Lily see a big future for themselves and the songs.
 

Note to the reader: In a film of this sort, do not include sentences such as “We plan to have songs by Dolly Parton, Taj Mahal, etc.” if such agreements have not been made, or the cost is not included in your budget.
**********


R-Rated Film, The Blair Witch Project

The Blair Witch Project is a caustic and terrifying story disguised as a documentary. Structured similarly to investigative television programs such as In Search Of, the film tracks the disappearance of three young filmmakers in 1994 while shooting a documentary on the Blair Witch. A fabled witch in Maryland folklore, she is said to be connected to many unexplained events and strange deaths. With "real-time" immediacy, The Blair Witch Project will show the Generation X-ers' horrifying journey into the supernatural and analyzes their fate with the scrutiny of serious documentary films such as The Thin Blue Line or Roger and Me. In reality, it is a mockumentary along the lines of This Is Spinal Tap and mimics horror films in the same way that Scream and Alien Autopsy do.

What our audience sees initially is that in October of 1994, three student filmmakers disappeared in the woods near Burkittsville, Maryland, while shooting a documentary. One year later, their footage was found. Three students ― Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, and Michael Williams ― set out to make a film about the local Maryland myth of the Blair Witch. Before departing into the woods, they interview the townspeople about their belief in the witch, gathering as many variations on the story as the number of people interviewed. They go into the woods with a new camera, camping equipment, and no fear. By having the actors themselves shoot the film, we will be able to make the film more believable than if it were staged and shot by a traditional director. As strange events occur, the students become lost in the woods and increasingly terrified. One student disappears and odd occult symbols are found every morning, no matter where the tent is pitched. 

The film will lure the viewer to a level of emotional involvement not possible in a narrative format by using the traditional techniques of non-fiction narrative to spellbind him with the "true" events, which unfold on the tapes. Since the actors will improvise much of the language and action in the film, we cannot at this time know all the events that will occur, the language that will be used, or the potential rating for the film by the Motion Picture Association of America. The fate of the filmmakers is depicted with the same calculated obscurity as the rest of the film. The audience is shown that their demise is an unpleasant one. But who actually did it, when, and how, is never revealed. Much like programs exploring UFOs, the Loch Ness Monster, or Bigfoot, the mystery is not solved. 


